---
layout: letter
title: "And one"
date: 2021-09-25 14:12:40 -0800
tags:
- Character
- Connection
- Discipline
- Encouragement
- Habits
---

My sons,

We all have different characters in our lives, and each one plays a specific role and occupies some amount of space within our social circle. Some of these characters bring joy to our lives, some bring insight, some bring comfort, and some bring companionship. Each relationship is unique, and each person adds different things to our overall experience.

It has been said that friends may be friends for a reason, a season, or a lifetime. Some friends are in our lives for a reason; whether it's to help us learn something, for us to go through an experience together, or simply because we're classmates for a particular class, there are some people that fulfill their purpose and then exit our lives almost as quickly as they entered. Others are here for a season; perhaps they are there to walk with us through a season of change, or to help shoulder our burdens through a season of pain, or to be our sounding board in a season of growth. Finally, there are a small number of friends that are around for a lifetime; they endure through thick and thin, and support and encourage us through all the best and the worst that life throws our way.

It is this lattermost group that is not only the most difficult to *find*, but also the most difficult for us to *be*.

In my life, I've only got a handful of friends that I *think* will be with me for my lifetime. As I consider these friendships, I realize that each of these friends has a common trait shared among them. They are *and one* people.

If you're basketball fans, then you'll know that in basketball, "and one" means that after you make a shot and get fouled, *you have the opportunity to add to your score*. Similarly in life, "and one" people are those who "add to your score". They are people who take whatever you do, think, or say, and add to it. When you tell an "and one" person your idea, they want to add to it, to riff on it with you, and to push you to think more. They say "yes, and you can also do this-and-that too!". A few things that are common across all of these people:

#### THEY FOCUS ON THE POSSIBLE
While "and one" people may see the negatives, the roadblocks, the hurdles, and the potential pitfalls, they choose to focus instead on what could be. They ask questions, provide support, cheerlead, and encourage us to expand on our ideas, to push past our perceived limitations, and to achieve more. Because of their focus on what *could be*, they give us that boost that we need to move forward.

#### THEY FOCUS ON YOU
We've all known people who listen to your story only long enough to remind them of some experience they've had that then causes them to interrupt and share with you. "And one" people focus on you. They are good listeners. They are there for you; not for themselves.

#### THEY HELP US BUILD MOMENTUM
We are by nature creatures of great inertia. "And one" people help us build the momentum that we need. They get excited about our ideas and create a virtuous cycle of forward thinking. They take our budding ideas and give them light to nurture.

Not only is it important to surround yourself with "and one" people, it is also equally important for us to learn to be "and one" people for others. I'm a big believer that a life well lived is one that impacts, influences, and inspires others to be the best version of themselves that they can be. "And one" people do this naturally. A few thoughts on how to become more of an "and one" person:

#### DON'T COMPLAIN
As Dale Carnegie posits in his book [https://www.amazon.com/How-Win-Friends-Influence-People/dp/0671027034](How to win friends and influence people), we ought not to complain. Yes, life may provide us with a series of unfortunate circumstances and events, but complaining doesn't do anything positive for us in the least. That's not to say that we shouldn't have hurt, upset, or angry feelings; rather it is to say that we ought to practice self control such that even when we're overcome with those feelings we don't complain.

By not complaining, we begin to orient our thinking along a positive track instead of a negative one, and in so doing become more able to see the positive in others.

#### THINK ABOUT OTHERS
It has been said that humility is not thinking less of yourself; it is thinking of yourself less. When we spend less time thinking about ourselves and more time thinking about others, we begin to think about the possibilities for their lives and endeavors and are more ready to support and encourage them.

#### BE "FOR" SOMEONE
Champion someone. Decide that you will become their biggest advocate. Be *for* them. As you take on this task you will find presently that not only are you able to espouse their great qualities but you are able to more readily see opportunities ahead of them to build on those qualities.

My sons, life is too short to be lived alone. Surround yourselves with people that are "and one" people, and be "and one" people for those you surround. Encourage one another, spur each other on, and move life forward together. I love you boys!
